---
title: "Papers on Automotive Control"
collection: publications
permalink: /publications/automotive
---

**Remember!** These electronic versions may differ from the final published papers; please obtain the originals if you wish to cite the paper.

* * *

| [**CPS**](#CPS) | [**HEV**](#HEV) | [**Powertrain**](#Powertrain) |

### <a name="CPS"></a>**Formal Methods for Advanced Vehicle Safety Systems**

1.  Yuxiao Chen, Ayonga Hereid, Huei Peng, Jessy Grizzle, \`\`[Enhancing the performance of a safe controller via supervised learning for truck lateral control](https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.05506/),'' under review since December 2017; this version is on the arXiv.
2.  Yuxiao Chen, Huei Peng, and Jessy W. Grizzle, \`\`[Fast Trajectory Planning and Robust Trajectory Tracking for Pedestrian Avoidance](http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7937809/),'' IEEE (Open) Access, 2017 Jun 1, pp. 9304-9317.
3.  Xiangru Xu, Jessy W. Grizzle, Paulo Tabuada, Aaron D. Ames, [Correctness Guarantees for the Composition of Lane Keeping and Adaptive Cruise Control](http://arxiv.org/abs/1609.06807) submitted July 28, 2016, uploaded to the arXiv 22 September 2016. 
4.  Petter Nilsson, Omar Hussien, Ayca Balkan, Yuxiao Chen, Aaron Ames, Jessy Grizzle, Necmiye Ozay, Huei Peng, and Paulo Tabuada, [Correct-by-Construction Adaptive Cruise Contro: Two Appraoches](/files/NilssonCST_2016.pdf) IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONTROL SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY, July 2016. [Erratum](http://web.eecs.umich.edu/~necmiye/n+_tcst16.html)
5.  A. Mehra, W-L. Ma, F. Berg, P. Tabuada, J. W. Grizzle and A. D. Ames, [\`\`Adaptive Cruise Control: Experimental Validation of Advanced Controllers on Scale-Model Cars,''](/files/ACC_Paper_cars_2015.pdf) American Control Conference (ACC), July 2015.
6.  Petter Nilsson, Omar Hussien, Yuxiao Chen, Ayca Balkan, Matthias Rungger, Aaron Ames, Jessy Grizzle, Necmiye Ozay, Huei Peng, and Paulo Tabuada, [Preliminary Results on Correct-by-Construction Control Software Synthesis for Adaptive Cruise Control](/files/CDC2014_FormalMetthods4ACC.pdf) 53rd IEEE Conference of Decision and Control (CDC 2014), December 2014. [\[**CarSim Video**\]](vids/CDC2014_submission_video.mp4).
7.  A. D. Ames, J.W. Grizzle and P. Tabuada, [\`\`Control Barrier Function based Quadratic Programs with Application to Adaptive Cruise Control,''](/files/CLF_QP_AdaptiveCruiseControl_final.pdf) 53rd IEEE Conference of Decision and Control (CDC 2014), December 2014.

### <a name="HEV"></a>HEV [Theory](#Theory) and [Vehicle Tests](#VehicleTests)

##### <a name="VehicleTests"></a>**In Vehicle Tests**

2.  Daniel F. Opila, Xiaoyong Wang, Ryan McGee, and J.W. Grizzle, [Real-Time Implementation and Hardware Testing of a Hybrid Vehicle Energy Management Controller Based on Stochastic Dynamic Programming.](/files/HEV-HW-ASME.pdf) _Journal of Dynamic Systems Measurement and Control,_. Vol. 135, Issue 3, March 2013.
3.  Chan-Chiao Lin, Huei Peng, J. W. Grizzle, Jason Liu and Matt Busdiecker [Control System Development for an Advanced-Technology Medium-Duty Hybrid Electric Truck](/files/03TB-451.pdf), _re-print,_ TB-56, SAE International Truck and Bus Conference, November 2003. Also appeared as SAE Paper number SAE2003-01-3369.
    
##### <a name="Theory"></a>**Underlying Theory and Analysis**
    
4.  Daniel F. Opila, Xiaoyong Wang, Ryan McGee, R. Brent Gillespie, Jeffrey A. Cook, and J.W. Grizzle, [An energy management controller to optimally trade off fuel economy and drivability for hybrid vehicles.](/files/HEV_TCST_revised.pdf) _IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology,_, 20(6):1490--1505, 2012. **Original Submission is here as well. It was as a two part series with more details:** [Incorporating Drivability Metrics into Optimal Energy Management Strategies for Hybrid Vehicles Part 1: Model, Methods, and Government Test Cycles](/files/HEV_TCST_1.pdf), _IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology,_, Submitted 8 January 2010, Preprint. [Incorporating Drivability Metrics into Optimal Energy Management Strategies for Hybrid Vehicles Part 2: Model, Methods, and Government Test Cycles](/files/HEV_TCST_2.pdf), _IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology,_, Submitted 8 January 2010, Preprint. [**Supplemental Figures**](/files/HEV_supplement.pdf).
5.  Daniel F. Opila, Xiaoyong Wang, Ryan McGee, Jeffrey A. Cook, and J.W. Grizzle, [Fundamental Structural Limitations of an Industrial Energy Management Controller Architecture for Hybrid Vehicles](/files/HEV_DSCC09Opila.pdf), _ASME Dynamic Systems and Control Conference,_, Hollywood, USA, October 12-14, 2009 Reprint.
6.  Daniel F. Opila, Xiaoyong Wang, Ryan McGee, Jeffrey A. Cook, and J.W. Grizzle, [Performance Comparison of Hybrid Vehicle Energy Management Controllers on Real-World Drive Cycle Data](/files/HEV_ACC09.pdf), _American Control Conference,_, St. Louis, USA, June, 2009. Reprint.
7.  Daniel F. Opila, Deepak Aswani, Ryan McGee, Jeffrey A. Cook, and J.W. Grizzle, [Incorporating Drivability Metrics into Optimal Energy Management Strategies for Hybrid Vehicles](/files/HEVCDC2008.pdf), _IEEE Conference on Decision and Control,_, Cancun, Mexico, December, 2008. Reprint.
8.  Ed Tate, J.W. Grizzle, and Huei Peng, [SP-SDP for Fuel Consumption and Tailpipe Emissions Minimization in an EVT Hybrid](/files/Tate_SP_SDP_EVT.pdf), _IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology,_ Volume: 18 , Issue: 3, 2010, pp. 673 - 687 Reprint. [Appendices to the Submitted Version](/files/Appendices_Tate_SP_SDP_EVT.pdf).
9.  Ed Tate, J.W. Grizzle, and Huei Peng, [Shortest Path Stochastic Control for Hybrid Electric Vehicles](/files/Tate_SP_SDP_HEV.pdf), _Int. Journal on Robust and Nonlinear Control,_, pp. 1409-1429, September 2008. REPRINT. [Appendices to the Published Version](/files/Appendices_Tate_SP_SDP_HEV.pdf). Published version at [WileyInterline](http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/cgi-bin/fulltext/117356683/PDFSTART) .
10.  Chan-Chiao Lin, Huei Peng, and J. W. Grizzle, [A Stochastic Control Strategy for Hybrid Electric Vehicles](/files/acc_04_lin_peng_grizzle.pdf), _Re-print,_ American Control Conference, 2004.
11.  Chan-Chiao Lin, Huei Peng, J.W. Grizzle and Jun-Mo Kang, [Power Management Strategy for a Parallel Hybrid Electric Truck](/files/HEV_TCST_2002.pdf), _Reprint,_ IEEE Trans. on Control Systems Technology,Volume: 11 , No. 6 , Nov. 2003 pp. 839 - 849
12.  Chan-Chiao Lin, Jun-Mo Kang, J.W. Grizzle, and Huei Peng, [Energy Management Strategy for a Parallel Hybrid Electric Truck,](/files/acc_hybrid_dp.pdf) _Reprint,_ 2001 American Control Conference, June, 2001.

### <a name="Powertrain"></a>Powertrain Modeling and Control

1.  Julia H. Buckland, J. S. Freudenberg, J. W. Grizzle and Mrdjan Jankovic,  [Practical observers for unmeasured states in turbocharged gasoline engines](/files/BucklandACC2009.pdf), _American Control Conference,_ ACC '09, 10-12 June 2009 Page(s):2714 - 2719 Reprint.
2.  Julia H. Buckland, Mrdjan Jankovic, J. W. Grizzle, and J. S. Freudenberg [Estimation Of Exhaust Manifold Pressure In Turbocharged Gasoline Engines With Variable Valve Timing](/files/jbuckland_asme_dscOctober2008.pdf), _1st Annual ASME Dynamics Systems and Control Conference,_, Oct. 20-22, 2008, Ann Arbor, MI Reprint.
3.  Jeffrey A. Cook, Jing Sun, Julia H. Buckland, Ilya V. Kolmanovsky, Huei Peng, and Jessy W. Grizzle [AUTOMOTIVE POWERTRAIN CONTROL---A SURVEY](/files/AJCsurvey_Cook_et_al.pdf),_Asian Journal of Control, Vol. 8, No. 3, pp. 237-260, September 2006._ REPRINT.
4.  K. Peterson, J.W. Grizzle, and A.G. Stefanopoulou, [Nonlinear Control for Magnetic Levitation of Automotive Engine Valves](/files/Peterson04_cst.pdf), _IEEE Tran. Control Systems Technology,_, Volume 14, Issue 2, March 2006, pp. 346 - 354. Reprint.
5.  K. Peterson, J.W. Grizzle, and A.G. Stefanopoulou, [Nonlinear Magnetic Levitation Of Automotive Engine Valves](/files/peterson_ifac_2004_conf.pdf) , 3rd IFAC Symposium on Mechatronic Systems, September 6-8, 2004, Sydney (Australia) **\[Kathy won a best paper presentation award!\]**
6.  Giovanni Fiengo, Jeffrey A. Cook, J.W. Grizzle, and A.Y. Karnik [Dual-UEGO Active Catalyst Control for Emissions Reduction: Design and Experimental Validation](/files/Dual_UEGO_control.pdf), Reprint IEEE Trans. on Control Systems Technology; Volume 13, Issue 5, Sept. 2005, pp. 722 - 736.
7.  Giovanni Fiengo, Jeffrey A. Cook and J.W. Grizzle, [Experimental Results on Dual-UEGO Active Catalyst Control](/files/ifac04_salerno.pdf), Re-print, submitted to First IFAC Symposium on Advances in Automotive Control, University of Salerno, Italy, April 19-23, 2004.
8.  D. Aswani, M. J. van Nieuwstadt, J. A. Cook, and J. W. Grizzle, [Control Oriented Modeling of a Diesel Active Lean NOx Catalyst Aftertreatment System](/files/alnc_diesel.pdf), ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. and Control. Paper submitted June 2003; final acceptance Feb. 2004. _pre-print_
9.  Jeffrey A. Cook, Jing Sun, and J.W. Grizzle, [Opportunities in Automotive Powertrain Control.](/files/CookSunGrizzle2002.pdf) _Reprint,_ IEEE Conference on Control Applications, September, 2002.**Plenary lecture presented by J.A. Cook of Ford Motor Company**
10.  Giovanni Fiengo, Jeffrey A. Cook and J.W. Grizzle, [Fore-Aft Oxygen Storage Control.](/files/ACC02-INV4001.pdf) _Reprint,_ American Control Conference, May, 2002.
11.  Jun-Mo Kang and J.W. Grizzle, [Dynamic Control of a SI Engine with Variable Intake Valve Timing.](/files/vvt_control.pdf) _Reprint,_ International Journal of Robust and Nonlinear Control, April 2003, pp. 399-420.
12.  J.W. Grizzle, Julia Buckland and Jing Sun [Idle Speed Control of a Direct Injection Spark Ignition Stratified Charge Engine.](/files/ISC4DISC.pdf) _Reprint,_ International Journal of Robust and Nonlinear Control, Vol. 11, No. 11, September 2001, pp. 1043-1072.
13.  Jun-Mo Kang, Ilya Kolmanovsky and J. W. Grizzle, [Dynamic Optimization of Lean Burn Engine Aftertreatment,](/files/dp_asme.pdf) _Reprint,_ ASME J. Dynamic Systems Measurement and Controls, Volume 123, Number 2, Page 153-160, June 2001.
14.  E.P. Brandt and J. W. Grizzle, [Three-Way Catalyst Diagnostics for Advanced Emissions Control Systems,](/files/acc_twc_diag.pdf) _Reprint,_ 2001 American Control Conference, June, 2001.
15.  Julia Buckland and J.W. Grizzle, [Idle Speed Control of a Lean Burn Direct Injection Spark Ignition Engin.](/files/avec2000.pdf) _Reprint,_ AVEC 2000, August 22-24, 2000, Ann Arbor, MI.
16.  E.P. Brandt, Y. Wang and J.W. Grizzle, [Dynamic Modeling of a Three-Way Catalyst for SI Engine Exhaust Emission Control.](/files/TWC98.pdf) _Reprint,_ IEEE T-Control Technology, Vol. 8, No. 5, September 2000, pp. 767-776. **Note:** In equation (20) of the paper, rpc represents the post catalyst air to fuel ratio and rst represents the stoichiometric air to fuel ratio.
17.  A.G. Stefanopoulou, J.S. Freudenberg and J.W. Grizzle [Variable Camshaft Timing Engine Control.](/files/vctcon.pdf) _Reprint,_ IEEE Transactions on Control System Technology, Vol. 8, No. 1, January 2000, pp. 23-34.
18.  Jun-Mo Kang, Ilya Kolmanovsky and J.W. Grizzle [Approximate Dynamic Programming Solutions for Lean Burn Engine Aftertreatment.](/files/gdi_dp_cdc99.pdf) _Reprint,_ Proceeding of the IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, Phoenix, AZ, December 7-10, 1999.
19.  Yanying Wang, Shankar Raman and J.W. Grizzle [Dynamic Modeling of a Lean Nox Trap for Lean Burn Engine Control.](/files/lnt_ACC99.pdf) _Reprint,_ Proceedings of the 1999 American Control Conference.
20.  Jun-Mo Kang and J.W. Grizzle [Nonlinear Control for Joint Air and Fuel Management in a SI Engine.](/files/acc99_manu.pdf) _Reprint,_ Proceedings of the 1999 American Control Conference.
21.  J.W. Grizzle [Model Based Performance Assessment of a Lean Burn System.](/files/dp.pdf) _Pre-print,_ Presentation made at the Workshop on the Integration of Modeling and Control for Automotive Systems, Santa Barbara, CA, June 5-6, 1999.
22.  Jun-Mo Kang and J.W. Grizzle [Engine A/F and Torque Control using Secondary Throttles.](/files/ifac.pdf) _Reprint,_ IFAC Workshop on Advances in Automotive Control, February 27-March 2, 1998, Mohican State Park, Ohio.
23.  A.G. Stefanopoulou, J. A. Cook, J. S.Freudenberg, and J. W. Grizzle [Control-Oriented Model of a Dual Equal Variable Cam Timing Spark Ignition Engine.](/files/vctmod.pdf) _Reprint,_ASME Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and Control, Vol. 120, pp. 257-266, 1998.
24.  E.P. Brandt, Y. Wang and J.W. Grizzle, [A Simplified Three-Way Catalyst Model for Use in On-Board Si Engine Control and Diagnostics, .](/files/twc_conf.pdf) _Reprint,_ The 1997 ASME International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition, Symposium on Advanced Automotive Engine Technologies: Power Train Modeling and Control, ASME, Nov. 16-21, 1997, Dallas, TX.
25.  J.A. Cook, J.W. Grizzle and J. Sun, ["Automotive Engine Control,''](/files/CRC_handbook1996.pdf) _Reprint,_ The Control Handbook, CRC Press, W. Levine, Ed., 1996, pp. 1261-1274.
26.  J.W. Grizzle, J.A. Cook and W.P. Milam, ["Improved Cylinder Air Charge Estimation for Transient Air Fuel Ratio Control''.](/files/airchg.pdf) _Reprint,_ 1994 Proceedings of The American Control Conference, 1994 - American Automatic Control Council, Baltimore, June 1994.
27.  J.W. Grizzle, J.A. Cook and W.P. Milam, [" Improved Transient Air-Fuel Ratio Control using Air Charge Estimation''.](/files/airchg.pdf) _Reprint,_ 1994 Proceedings of The American Control Conference, 1994 - American Automatic Control Council, Baltimore, June 1994. **(Same as the previous paper, but is often cited by this erroneous title!)**
28.  P.E. Moraal, J.A. Cook, and J.W. Grizzle, ["Modeling the Induction Process of an Automobile Engine,''](/files/MoraalCookGrizzle1994.pdf) _Reprint,_ Control Problems in Industry, I. Lasiecka and B. Morton, Eds., Birkauser, 1994, pp. 253-270.
29.  J.W. Grizzle, K. Dobbins and J. Cook, ["Individual cylinder air-fuel ratio control with a single EGO sensor''.](/files/GrizzleDobbinsCook_ICAFC.pdf) _Reprint, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 40, No. 1, February 1991, pp. 280-286. **Vehicular Electronics Paper of the Year.**_
30.  _B. K. Powell, J. A. Cook and J. W. Grizzle [Modelling and Analysis of an Inherently Multi-Rate Sampling Fuel Injected Engine Idle Speed Control Loop.](/files/PowellCookGrizzle1987.pdf) _Reprint,_ ASME Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and Control, ,Vol. 109, pp. 405-410,December 1987._