---
title: "Papers on Nonlinear Theory"
collection: publications
permalink: /publications/control
---

==========================

**Remember!** These electronic versions may differ from the final published papers; please obtain the originals if you wish to cite the paper.

* * *

1.  Xiangru Xu, Jessy W. Grizzle, Paulo Tabuada, Aaron D. Ames, [Correctness Guarantees for the Composition of Lane Keeping and Adaptive Cruise Control](http://arxiv.org/abs/1609.06807) submitted 28 July 2016, uploaded to the arXiv 22 September 2016. 
2.  Aaron D. Ames, Xiangru Xu, Jessy W. Grizzle, and Paulo Tabuada [Control Barrier Function Based Quadratic Programs with Application to Automotive Safety Systems,](https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.06408) _Preprint_ IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control; Submitted June 2015; Revised and Resubmitted 20 April 2016. [Uploaded to the arXiv](http://arxiv.org/abs/1609.06408) on 21 September 2016
3.  Kevin Galloway, Koushil Sreenath, Aaron D. Ames, and J. W. Grizzle, [Torque Saturation in Bipedal Robotic Walking through Control Lyapunov Function Based Quadratic Programs,](papers/CLF_ConvexOptim.pdf) _Reprint_, IEEE Access, Vol. 3, April 2015, pp. 323 - 332**Remark**\] While the result is illustrated here for a 2D robot, it applies to 3D compliant robots as well. Only depends on HZD. \[**Supplemental Material**\][Video on YouTube](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rc1FSXpfrrM&list=UUMfDV8rkQqWhUwnTAYAq0tQ) Other robotics video are here: [Dynamic Leg Locomotion](http://www.youtube.com/user/DynamicLegLocomotion).
4.  K. Akbari Hamed, B.G. Buss and J.W. Grizzle, Robust Stabilizing Continuous-Time Controllers for Periodic Orbits of Hybrid Systems: Application to Bipedal Robots,_Submitted on 16 July 2014,_ IEEE Transaction of Robotics. [\[**Animation 1**\]](vids/TRO2014_AkbariHamedBussGrizzle_ATRIAS.mp4),
5.  K. Akbari Hamed, B. G. Buss, and J. W. Grizzle, [Continuous-Time Controllers for Stabilizing Periodic Orbits of Hybrid Systems: Application to an Underactuated 3D Bipedal Robot](papers/CDC_2014_BMI.pdf) 53rd IEEE Conference of Decision and Control (CDC 2014), December 2014. [\[**Supplemental Material**\]](papers/CDC_2014_BMI_Proofs.pdf).
6.  A. D. Ames, J.W. Grizzle and P. Tabuada, [\`\`Control Barrier Function based Quadratic Programs with Application to Adaptive Cruise Control,''](papers/CLF_QP_AdaptiveCruiseControl_final.pdf) 53rd IEEE Conference of Decision and Control (CDC 2014), December 2014.
7.  Aaron D. Ames, Kevin Galloway, J.W. Grizzle, and Koushil Sreenath [Rapidly Exponentially Stabilizing Control Lyapunov Functions and Hybrid Zero Dynamics,](papers/CFL_Robotics_2012TAC.pdf)_reprint 2_ IEEE TAC, Vol. 59, NO. 4, pp 876-891. \[**Supplemental Material**\] [Video on YouTube](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=onOd7xWbGAk&list=UUMfDV8rkQqWhUwnTAYAq0tQ&index=1&feature=plpp_video) Other robotics video are here: [Dynamic Leg Locomotion](http://www.youtube.com/user/DynamicLegLocomotion).
8.  A.R. Teel, R. Goebel, B. Morris, A.D. Ames, J.W. Grizzle, [A stabilization result with application to bipedal locomotion,](papers/cdc2013-bipedal-clf.pdf), IEEE Conf. on Decision and Control, Florence, Italy, Dec., 2013.
9.  Aaron D. Ames, Kevin Galloway, J.W. Grizzle, and Koushil Sreenath [Rapidly Exponentially Stabilizing Control Lyapunov Functions and Hybrid Zero Dynamics,](papers/CFL_Robotics_2012TAC.pdf)_Submitted 26 Nov. 2012,_ IEEE TAC. \[**Supplemental Material**\] [Video on YouTube](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=onOd7xWbGAk&list=UUMfDV8rkQqWhUwnTAYAq0tQ&index=1&feature=plpp_video) Other robotics video are here: [Dynamic Leg Locomotion](http://www.youtube.com/user/DynamicLegLocomotion).
10.  Aaron D. Ames, Kevin Galloway, and J.W. Grizzle, [Control Lyapunov Functions and Hybrid Zero Dynamics,](papers/CDC12_1692_FI.pdf) _Reprint_ 2012-CDC, Hawaii, USA, December, 2012. \[**Supplemental Material**\] The proofs could not be included in the final 6 page submission, so they are given here: [Proofs for CLF and HZD](papers/cdc_2012_agg_proofs_separate.pdf).
11.  Ioannis Poulakakis and J. W. Grizzle, [The Spring Loaded Inverted Pendulum as the Hybrid Zero Dynamics of an Asymmetric Hopper,](papers/poulakakis_grizzle_TAC_07.pdf) _Published_ IEEE Transaction on Automatic Control, Volume 54, Issue 8, Aug. 2009 Page(s):1779 - 1793.
12.  B. Morris and J.W. Grizzle, [Hybrid Invariant Manifolds in Systems with Impulse Effects with Application to Periodic Locomotion in Bipedal Robots,](papers/Morris_Grizzle_TAC_2007.pdf) _Published_ IEEE Transaction on Automatic Control, Volume 54, Issue 8, Aug. 2009 Page(s):1751 - 1764
13.  Ioannis Poulakakis and J. W. Grizzle, [Formal Embedding of the Spring Loaded Inverted Pendulum in an Asymmetric Hopper,](papers/ECC_07_poulakakis_grizzle.pdf) _Reprint_ European Control Conference (2007-ECC), Kos, Greece, July 2007.
14.  B. Morris and J.W. Grizzle, [A Restricted Poincare Map for Determining Exponentially Stable Periodic Orbits in Systems with Impulse Effects: Application to Bipedal Robots,](papers/CDC_2005_Morris_Grizzle.pdf) _Reprint_ 2005-CDC, Seville, Spain, December, 2005.
15.  J.W. Grizzle, C.H. Moog, and C. Chevallereau, [Nonlinear Control of Mechanical Systems with an Unactuated Cyclic Variable.](papers/minzerodyn.pdf) _Re-print,_ IEEE-TAC, Vol. 30, No. 5, May 2005, pp. 559-576. [\[**Supplemental Material**\]](Supplemental-Material-Nonlinear-Control-of-Mechanical-Systems-with-an-Unactuated-Cyclic-Variable.html).
16.  K. Peterson, J.W. Grizzle, and A.G. Stefanopoulou, [Nonlinear Control for Magnetic Levitation of Automotive Engine Valves](papers/Peterson04_cst.pdf), _Re-print,_ IEEE Tran. Control Systems Technology, Volume 14, Issue 2, March 2006. pp. 346 - 354
17.  K. Peterson, J.W. Grizzle, and A.G. Stefanopoulou, [Nonlinear Magnetic Levitation Of Automotive Engine Valves](papers/peterson_ifac_2004_conf.pdf) , 3rd IFAC Symposium on Mechatronic Systems, September 6-8, 2004, Sydney (Australia) **\[Kathy won a best paper presentation award!\]**
18.  C. Chevallereau, J.W. Grizzle, and C.H. Moog, [Nonlinear Control of Mechanical Systems with one Degree of Underactuation.](papers/chevallereau-icra04.pdf) _Re-print,_ ICRA 2004, New Orleans, April 26 to May 1, 2004. [\[**Supplemental Material**\]](Supplemental-Material-Nonlinear-Control-of-Mechanical-Systems-with-one-Degree-of-Underactuation.html).
19.  E.R. Westervelt, J.W. Grizzle, and D.E. Koditschek, [Hybrid Zero Dynamics of Planar Biped Walkers.](papers/hybrid_zdyn_TAC.pdf) _Reprint,_ IEEE-TAC, Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2003, pp. 42-56.[\[**Supplemental Material**\]](Hybrid-Zero-Dynamics-of-Planar-Biped-Robots-Supplemental-Material.html).
20.  J.W. Grizzle and Jun-Mo Kang [Discrete-time Control Design with Positive Semi-Definite Lyapunov Functions.](papers/clf_SCL.pdf) _,_ Systems and Control Letters, 43, 2001, pp. 287-292.
21.  S. Diop, V. Fromion, and J.W. Grizzle [A resettable Kalman filter,](papers/2001ecc_submitted.pdf) Reprint, _Proceedings of the 2001 European Control Conference_ .
22.  J.W. Grizzle, Gabriel Abba and Franck Plestan, [Asymptotically Stable Walking for Biped Robots: Analysis via Systems with Impulse Effects.](papers/biped.pdf) _Reprint,_ IEEE T-AC, Volume 46, No. 1, January 2001, pp. 51-64. [revised version.](papers/biped_rev.pdf) This paper received the **2002 George S. Axelby Award** for the Best Paper in the IEEE Trans. Auto. Control during the years 2000 and 2001.
23.  S. Diop, J.W. Grizzle and F. Chaplais [On Numerical Differentiation Algorithms for Nonlinear Estimation,](papers/numdiff_cdc00.pdf) Reprint, _Proceedings of the 2000 IEEE Conference on Decision and Control,_ Australia, December 2000.
24.  Franck Plestan and J.W. Grizzle, [Synthesis Of Nonlinear Observers Via Structural Analysis And Numerical Differentiation.](papers/ecc99.pdf) _Reprint,_ Proceedings of the September 1999 European Control Conference.
    
    ### A few older papers (See also [IEEE Xplore](http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/Xplore/dynhome.jsp))
    
25.  Y.K. Song and J.W. Grizzle, [The Extended Kalman Filter as a Local Asymptotic Observer for Nonlinear Discrete-Time Systems,](papers/ekf.pdf) _Reprint,_ Journal of Mathematical Systems, Estimation and Control, Vol. 5, No. 1, 1995, pp. 59-78. (The journal in which this appeared seems to be hard for people to find) [(submitted version)](papers/ekf_orig.pdf)
26.  P. Moraal and J.W. Grizzle [Observer design for nonlinear systems with discrete-time measurements,](papers/MoraalGrizzle1995TAC.pdf) _Reprint,_ IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, Vol. 40, No. 3, pp. 395--404, 1995.
27.  P. Moraal and J.W. Grizzle [Asymptotic observers for detectable and poorly observable systems,](papers/Moraal_Grizzle_CDC95.pdf) Reprint, _Proceedings of the 1995 IEEE Conference on Decision and Control,_ New Orleans, December 1995.
28.  J.W. Grizzle, [A Linear Algebraic Framework for the Analysis of Discrete-Time Nonlinear Systems,](papers/LinAlgDiscreteTimeNLsystems.pdf) _Reprint,_ SIAM J. Control, Vol. 31, No. 4, July 1993, pp. 1026-1044.
29.  S. Diop, J.W. Grizzle, P.E. Moraal, and A. Stefanopoulou, [Interpolation and Numerical Differentiation for Observer Design](papers/numdiff_acc_mats.pdf), Reprint, _1994 American Control Conference,_ Baltimore, June 1994, pp. 1329-1333. Here is a longer version that appeared as an [internal report](papers/numdiff_internal_report1995.pdf) \[Control Group Reports, EECS Department, University of Michigan, September 1993\]; it has more examples.
30.  S. T. Chung and J.W. Grizzle [Sampled-Data Observer Error Linearization,](papers/ChungGrizzle1990.pdf) _Reprint,_ Automatica, Vol. 26, No. 6, November, 1990, pp. 997-1007.
31.  M.D. Di Benedetto and J.W. Grizzle [An Intrinsic Notion of Regularity for Output Nulling, Inversion, and Dynamic Extension,](papers/DiBenedettoGrizzle1990.pdf) _Reprint,_ Control Theory and Advanced Technology, vol. 6, No. 3, September 1990. pp. 357-381.
32.  M.D. Di Benedetto, J.W. Grizzle and C.H. Moog, [Rank Invariants of Nonlinear Systems,](papers/RankInvariantsSiam1989.pdf) _Reprint,_ SIAM J. Control, Vol. 27, No. 3, May 1989, pp. 658-672.
33.  J. W. Grizzle and A. Isidori, [Block Noninteracting Control with Stability via Static State Feedback,](papers/GrizzleIsidori1989.pdf) _Reprint,_ Mathematics of Control, Signals, and Systems, Vol. 2, 1989, pp. 315-341.
34.  J. W. Grizzle, [Local Input-Output Decoupling of Discrete Time Nonlinear Systems,](papers/GrizzleDecoupling1986.pdf) _Reprint,_ Int. J. of Control, Vol 43, No. 5, pp. 1517-1530, 1986.
35.  J.W. Grizzle, [Feedback Linearization of Discrete-Time Systems,](papers/FdbkLinearizationDiscreteTimeSystems1986.pdf) _Reprint,_ Lecture Notes in Control and Information Sciences, Vol. 83, Antibes, France, pp. 273-281, June 1986.
36.  J. W. Grizzle, [Distributions Invariantes Commandees pour les Systemes Non Lineaires en Temps Discret,](papers/GrizzleDistInv1985.pdf) _Reprint,_ C. R. Acad. Sc. Paris, t. 300, Serie I, no. 13, pp. 447-450, 1985.
37.  Jessy W. Grizzle, Steven I. Marcus and Kai Hsu, [A decentralized control strategy for multiaccess broadcast networks,](papers/DecentralizedMultiaccess.pdf) _Reprint,_ Large Scale Systems, North-Holland Publishing Company, Vol. 3, 1982, pp. 75-78.
38.  R. J. Mulholland and J. W. Grizzle, [\`\`Modeling Perturbations of the Global Carbon Cycle,"](papers/GlobalCarbonCycle1979.pdf) _Reprint,_ Proc. of the International Conference on Cybernetics and Society, pp. 690-694, 1979.

### A few more older documents (See also [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/citations?hl=en&user=heYuqBkAAAAJ))

40.  J. W. Grizzle, [\`Distributions Invariantes Commandees en Temps Discret,"](papers/AutomatiqueTheoriqueFrench1985.pdf) C.R. Acad. Sc. Paris, t. 300, Serie I, No. 13, pp. 447-450, 1985.
41.  J.S. Freudenberg and J. W. Grizzle, ["An Observation on the Parameterization of Causal Stabilizing Controllers for Lifted Systems,"](papers/ObservationParameterizatioinCausualStabilizingControllersLiftedSystems1989.pdf) Control-Theory adn Advanced Technology, Vol. 5, No. 3, pp. 367-372, 1989.
42.  J. W. Grizzle, ["Controlled Invariance for Discrete-Time Nonlinear Systems with an Application to the Disturbance Decoupling Problem,"](papers/ControlledInvarianceDiscreteTime.pdf) IEEE Trans. on Automatic Control, Vol. AC-30, No. 9, pp. 868-874, September 1985.
43.  Kevin Buescher, ["Representation, Analysis, adn Design of Multirate Discrete-time Control Systems,"](papers/ThesisKevinBuescher1986.pdf) MS Thesis, Electrical Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1988.
44.  B.K. Powell, J.A. Cook, and J. W. Grizzle, ["Modelling and Analysis of Inherently Multi-Rate Sampling Fuel Injected Engine Idle Speed Control Loop,"](papers/TechnicalBriefs1987.pdf) Technical Brief, Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement and Control, Vol. 109, pp. 405-410, December 1987.
45.  B.K. Powell, J.A. Cook, and J. W. Grizzle, ["Modelling and Analysis of Inherently Multi-Rate Sampling Fuel Injected Engine Idle Speed Control Loop,"](papers/MultirateIdleSpeed.pdf) Proceddings of the Amwerican Control Conference, Minneapolis, MN, pp. 1543-1547, June 1987.
46.  J. W. Grizzle and M.H. Shor, ["Sampling, Infinite Zeros and Decoupling of Linear Systems,"](papers/SamplingInfiniteZerosDecouplingLinearSystems1988.pdf) Automatica, Vol. 24, No. 3, pp. 387-396, 1989.